CHAPTER 1
Once upon a time there were three men—Able,  Baker, and Charlie—who lived alone on an island.  Far from a tropical paradise, the island was a rough  place with no luxuries. In particular, food options  were extremely limited. The menu consisted of just  one item: fish. 
 
Fortunately, the island was surrounded by an abundant  population of strangely homogeneous fish, any one of  which was large enough to feed one human being for one  day. However, this was an isolated place where  none of mankind’s many  advancements in fish-catching  technology had arrived. The  best these guys could do was  jump in and grab the slimy  buggers by hand.  Using this ineffi cient technique, each could catch one  fish per day, which was just enough to survive to the next  day. This activity amounted to the sum total of their island  economy. Wake, fish, eat, sleep. Not much of a life, but hey,  it beats the alternative.  And so, in this super simple, sushi-based  island society  there are…. 
No savings! 
No credit! 
No investment!
Everything that is produced is consumed! There is nothing  saved for a rainy day, and there is nothing left to lend.  
 

AN IDEA IS BORN 
Although our island dwellers lived in a primitive society, it  didn’t mean that they were stupid or lacked ambition. Like all  humans, Able, Baker, and Charlie wanted to improve their  living standards. But in order to do this, they had to be able  to catch more than one fish apiece per day, which was the  minimum they needed to survive. Unfortunately, given the  limitations of their bare hands and the agility of fish, the three  were stuck at subsistence level. One night, looking up into the star-studded sky, Able began  pondering the meaning of his life…. “Is this all there is? There  must be more to life than this.”  You see, Able wanted to do something besides fi shing by hand.  He’d love to make some better, more fashion-forward palm-leaf  clothing, he wanted a place to shelter himself from monsoons,  and ultimately, of course, he wanted to direct feature fi lms. But  with his daily toil so devoted to fi shing, how could these dreams  ever come true?  His mental wheels started turning…  and suddenly an idea for a fish  catcher was born…a device that  could vastly expand the reach of the human hand while severely reducing a fi sh’s ability to escape  after the initial grab. With such  a contraption, perhaps more fish  could be caught in less time! With  his newfound time, perhaps he could  start to make better clothes, build a shelter, and put the  fi nishing touches on his screenplay.

 
As the device took shape in his mind, the  orchestral music began to swell, and  suddenly he conceived of a future free  from daily fish drudgery. He decided to call his device a “net,” and he set  about fi nding materials to build one.  The next day, Baker and Charlie noticed that Able wasn’t  fi shing. Instead, he was standing in the sand, making string out  of palm bark. “What gives?” asked Baker. “Are you on a diet or  something? If you keep sitting there tying those strings, you’re  gonna go hungry.”  Able explained, “I have been inspired to create a device  that will unlock oceans of fishing possibilities. When I’m fi nished, I’ll spend less time  fi shing, and I’ll never go  hungry again.” Charlie rolled his eyes  and wondered if his friend  had fi nally lost his mind.  “This is madness, I tell you… madness. When it doesn’t  work, don’t come crying for a  piece of my fish. Just because  I’m sane doesn’t mean I’m gonna pay for your crazy.” Undeterred, Able continued weaving. 


REALITY CHECK
In this simple task, Able is demonstrating a basic econom ic principle that can lead to an improvement in living  standards: He is underconsuming and he is taking risk!  Underconsumption: In order to build his net, Able is  unable to fish that day. He has to forgo the income (the  fish) that he would have otherwise caught and eaten.  It’s not that Able lacks the demand for fish. In fact, he  loves fish and he will go hungry if he doesn’t get one  that day. Able has no more or less demand for fish than  his two friends. But he is choosing to defer that con sumption in order to potentially consume more in the  future. Risktaking: Able is also taking risk because he has no  idea that his device will actually work, or allow him to  catch enough fish to compensate for his sacrifi ce. In  the end, he might just have a bunch of string and an  empty stomach. If his idea fails, he can expect no com pensation from Baker and Charlie, who did, after all, try  to warn him of his folly. In economic terms, capital is a piece of equipment that  is built and used not for its own sake, but for building or  making something else that is wanted. Able doesn’t want  the net. He wants the fish. The net can, maybe, get him  more fish. Therefore, the net, a piece of capital, is valuable. By day’s end Able had completed his net! He had created  capital through his self-sacrifi ce! 
 
That night, while Baker and Charlie slept with full stomachs,  Able dealt with hunger pangs while images of luscious  fish danced in his head. However, his pain was more than  overcome by his hope that he had done the right thing and  that a bright, fish-fi lled future awaited.  The next day, Baker and Charlie made much sport of Able’s  invention.  “Hey, that’s quite a nice looking hat,” said Baker. “A little hot for tennis, don’t  ya think?” added Charlie.  “Laugh it up, boys,” responded Able, “but let’s see who’s  laughing when I’m up to my armpits in fish guts.”  As Able charged into the surf, the ridicule kept coming as he  awkwardly handled his strange new device. After a few minutes he got the hang of it and in no time  snagged a doozy. Baker and Charlie stopped laughing. When, in just another  hour, Able landed his second fish of the day, the boys were  in awe. After all, it generally took them all day to get just  one fish! From this one simple act, the island’s economy was about  to change in a very big way. Able had just increased his  productivity, and that was a good thing for everybody.  For the moment, Able pondered his sudden boon. “Since I  can provide two days of food with only one day of fi shing,  I can use every other day to do something else. The  possibilities are endless!” 

REALITY CHECK
By doubling his productivity Able is now able to  produce more than he needs to consume. From gains in  productivity all other economic benefits flow.  Before Able rolled the dice to build his net, the island had  no store of savings. His willingness to take a chance and go  hungry led to the island’s first piece of capital equipment,  which in turn produced savings (for the sake of this story  we will assume that fish do not spoil). This spare produc tion is the lifeblood of a healthy economy. 
 
TAKEAWAY TAKEAWAY
For all species, except our own, economics really boils down to day-to-day survival. Given the competition  for scarce food, the harshness of the elements, the danger of  predators, the vulnerability to disease, and the relative rarity  of innovation, bare-bones survival (with some time left over  for reproduction) is about all animals can attain. We would  be in the same boat (as we were in the not-too-distant past)  if not for two things: our big brains and our dexterous hands.  Using the two together, we have been able to build tools  and machines that magnify our ability to get more out of our  environment.  Economist Thomas Woods likes to challenge his students  with a simple thought experiment: What kind of economy  would we have if all machines and tools disappeared?  Cars, tractors, iron smelters, shovels, wheelbarrows, saws,  hammers, spears, everything. What if they all went poof and  all that we consumed had to be hunted, gathered, grown,  and made, WITH OUR BARE HANDS?  Without question, life would be rough. Imagine how hard  it would be to eat if we had to bring down game with our  teeth, fi sts, and fi ngernails. Large game would be out of the  question. Rabbits would be within our power to subdue… but you would have to catch them fi rst. What if vegetables  had to be planted and picked by hand, and what if we didn’t  even have sacks in which to carry the harvest? Imagine if  we had to make clothes and furniture without factories… without even scissors or nails?   

Despite our intelligence, we would be no better off,  economically at least, than chimps and orangutans. Tools change everything and create the possibility of an  economy. Spears help us bring down game, shovels help  us plant crops, and nets help us catch fish. These devices  magnify the effi cacy of our labor. The more we can make,  the more we can consume, and the more prosperous our  lives become.  The simplest defi nition of economy is the effort to maximize  the availability of limited resources (and just about every  resource is limited) to meet as many human demands as  possible. Tools, capital, and innovation are the keys to this  equation. Keeping this in mind, it is easy to see what makes economies  grow: fi nding better ways of producing more stuff that  humans want. This doesn’t change…no matter how big an  economy eventually gets. 

CHAPTER 2
Able, the entrepreneur, seems to have a bright future.  But what about the rest of the island? Haven’t we just  created a caste system of the have and have-nots? Will  Baker and Charlie suffer because of Able’s success? Not  likely. Although it was never his intention to benefi t  anyone other than himself, Able’s capital helps everyone  nevertheless. Let’s see how. 
 
SHARING THE WEALTH
After witnessing the ease with which Able now catches his  fish, Baker and Charlie asked him to share his innovative fish  catcher. “Hey, Able,” said Charlie, “since you use that thingy only  every other day, how about you let me use it the day you’re  out doing other stuff?”  “C’mon, share the wealth,  buddy,” added Baker.  But Able didn’t just  fall off the tuna truck  yesterday. He remembers  his self-sacrifice … he  remembered their scorn,  and he thought of the  risk. “What if they break my net? What if they just don’t  give it back? Then it’s back to square one for me. So long,  designer leafwear!” With all this downside, Able turned them down. “Sorry, guys,  no can do. I made my own net, so can you. At least you guys  know that the thing works!”

Although Charlie saw the efficiency of using a net, he was  apprehensive about the prospect of building one for himself.  He responded to Able, “How do I know if I’ll get it right? I’ve  never made one of those things before, and besides I don’t  do well with hunger. I get the shakes. I might starve to death  before I make a decent net!” Baker stepped forward with another proposal. “Okay  tightwad, so you’re not gonna do us any favors. We get it.  But how about this? Lend us some of your surplus fish to eat  while we make our own nets. That way we won’t starve as we  build, and we’ll repay every fish we borrow from you from the  extra fish we catch!” Although the idea appealed to Able more than giving away his net, he was still very skeptical. “But if I lend you my fish, I have no guarantee  that you  won’t just lie  on the beach  and take the  day off! Even if you build your own nets, they may not  even work. Either way, you’ll never be able to repay me,  and I would have lost my savings for nothing! You gotta do  better than that.” 

Charlie and Baker conceded the point. They realized that  they were asking Able to take a risk for no personal benefi t.  But the lure of extra fish was too strong. Before long they  came up with a way to entice him into taking a chance. They thought, they crunched the numbers, and fi nally a fi nancial idea was born! Baker approached Able and said,  “Let’s make a deal: For every  fish you lend us, we’ll pay  you back two. That’s a 100  percent profi t. Where else are  you gonna get a return like  that on an island like this?” Able is persuaded, “Now that interests me!” he said with no apparent irony.  Able thought of the riches, “If I lend them two fish I’ll get  back four.” I’ll be two fish richer without doing any work.  I’ll be a fish tycoon!” To some it may appear  that Able has crossed a  line. If this were a  Hollywood movie  he would start  twirling his waxed  mustache. He would  be making money off  the backs of others’ labor,  drawing profi ts from their toil! 


But that image doesn’t hold water. Even if Able intends only  to fi ll his own fish coffers, his greed, for lack of a better word,  would provide a benefi t that would have otherwise been  unavailable. 
It’s important to note that Able does not need to make the loan.  He has other options, including these four:  
1. He simply might hold on to his fish for  future use….This is the most secure  option. He would be guaranteed to not  have any losses, but of course his  savings wouldn’t grow. 
2. He could simply indulge  himself and consume his savings. 
3. He could build his own net rental  company. He reckoned that if he  consumed one of his reserve fish  a day for two days, he could build  two more nets. He could then rent the  extra nets to Baker and  Charlie for half of a fish  each day. With each  of the two kicking in  half of a fish every  day to his net rental  company, Able  would have the one fish a day he needs to live, without  ever having to go fi shing himself. Hello, early retirement! In this scenario, Baker and Charlie would be able to  catch two fish per day with their new nets. After paying  Able their half fish rent per day, they would still have one  and a half fish per day each. That’s 50 percent more than  they would have had with no nets. It’s a win-win. Although intriguing, Able noticed some fl aws in his  logic. Baker and Charlie might rent the nets for two days … then use their savings to build nets for themselves. In such a  scenario he would be only two fish ahead … that’s a real risk! 
4. He could lend out his two fish to Baker and Charlie and  charge them 100 percent interest. In  this scenario, he’d get four fish  back if they paid him back in  full with interest. But, there  was always a risk that they’d  stiff him.  

Decisions … decisions … decisions!  
To summarize, Able (and society) can do only fi ve things with  savings: 
1. He can save what he has saved. 
2. He can consume what he has saved. 
3. He can lend out what he has saved. 
4. He can invest what he has saved. 
5. He can try a combination of the other four options. 

Unquestionably, Able’s ultimate decision will be based on his  own desire for risk and reward. But whatever he does, he is  benefi ting the island economy and is imposing no burdens on  his neighbors.

In the end, Able decides to make the loan.
 
REALITY CHECK
As a result of Able’s willingness, and ability, to make loans,  
Baker and Charlie now have nets that they didn’t own  
before. With nets available to all, the island’s collective fi shing  capacity has been raised from three fish per day to six. The  economy has doubled in size, and the future looks brighter.  
But this didn’t happen just because the three guys were  unsatisfi ed with their limited lifestyle. Their hunger, which is  labeled “demand” in economic terms, was necessary to spur  economic growth but not suffi cient to achieve it. 
Demand for more is natural to all humans. No matter  what we have, we always want more. Maybe not more  stuff, but certainly more time, more fun, and more  
choices, all of which requires more capital. Able, Baker,  and Charlie likely had the same fish gripes for years.  The difference is that they were fi nally able to expand  productivity to meet those demands. 
With their extra fish, the islanders can fi nally eat more than  one fish per day. But the economy didn’t grow because  they consumed more. They consumed more because the  economy grew. This is a simple concept, but it’s amazing  what modern economists can do with a simple concept.  
Most economists think that demand can be increased  by giving people more money to spend. But that doesn’t  change real demand, just how much people can spend on  items that have been produced. Only by increasing supply  can people actually get more of what they demand. 

To some it may appear that Able used his advantage to  exploit his needy neighbors. And while it’s true that he made  a profi t without working, it doesn’t mean he gets something  for nothing. Able’s profi t is his compensation for the risks he  takes. What’s more, his ability to profi t doesn’t hinder the  advancement of his peers.  
Because of Able’s desire to make a profi t from his savings,  Baker and Charlie got the opportunity to build nets without  having to under consume. If they succeed, they will have  improved their economic futures without having to go hungry.  The rest will be gravy… or more accurately, fish oil. At that  point, they themselves will have excess capital. If they fail, and  are unable to pay back the loan, it’s Able who takes the loss. 
Essentially, the lender can benefi t only if the borrower benefi ts. 
Of course, others may not see the mutual benefi ts as clearly.  What if, upon seeing Able’s sudden expansion of wealth,  Baker and Charlie grew envious and demanded a portion of  his savings?  
Imagine this alternative scenario: 
Baker fretted, “Look at that guy lording it over us with his  fancy palm-leaf tuxedo, while we sweat it out in the waves  every day wrangling slimy fish. Hasn’t that guy ever heard of  charity? Couldn’t he just spare me a fish or two so I could  take a day off once in a while? He’s got so many fish piling  up, he’d never even know one was gone.” 

Charlie concurred, “Share the wealth, elitist!”  
Or, what about this scenario: 

Let’s suppose Able, feeling somewhat guilty about his  comparative wealth, was swayed by their arguments and gave  away his fish, asking for nothing in return. What would Baker  and Charlie do with the extra fish? 
If they were free from the burden of repayment, they would  most likely use the gift to increase their leisure time. And  while there is nothing inherently wrong with leisure (in fact,  it is the goal of most human activity), Baker and Charlie’s  vacation would not increase the island’s productive capacity  by a herring. And so while the  
charity option sounds more  
magnanimous, and may improve  
Able’s popularity,  
it doesn’t provide  
the economic  
boost that  
a business  
loan would. 

The bottom line is that anything that leads to more fish  catching (production) benefi ts the island. The more fish  there are, the more possibilities there are for everybody to  eat more, do something besides fi shing, or perhaps,  do nothing at all. 

REALITY CHECK

Some may wonder what would happen if Able turns out to  
be a really greedy guy, who would use his new wealth just  to get richer and richer. 
Is this really a danger? If the only way to make his savings  grow (without working himself) is to make it available to  other members of the community, why would he hoard it? 
Otherwise his wealth will stay the same or get smaller as  he personally consumes it! The best thing about private  capitalism is that it forces those who may only be motivated  by personal gain to raise the living standards of others. 
24 

TAKEAWAY TAKEAWAY
Wealth is always a relative term. In a primitive  
society where little is produced, even the richest  can’t match the material well-being available to the poor  of an industrialized economy. In the Middle Ages, even  the mightiest kings lacked the basic amenities that nearly  everyone in the United States now takes for granted… things like central heating, indoor plumbing, and fresh  vegetables in the winter. And although Baker and Charlie  would imagine that a two-fish-per-day diet was the height  of luxury, from our perspective such a lifestyle hardly  seems enviable. 
But the fact that there are degrees of wealth has always  struck some as being inherently unfair. Central in this un ease is the belief that the rich become that way because they  take wealth from others, thereby creating the poor. In mod ern economics, some have even labeled this idea “the labor  theory of value,” which states that profi t is created by paying  workers less than they are worth. In this view, entrepreneurs,  like Able or giant corporations for that matter, can get rich  only if they succeed in making others poor.  
This idea has everything to do with moral posturing, and  nothing to do with reality. The reason that the rich get that  way (at least initially) is that they offer something of value to  others. Able offers loans to those who have inadequate sav ings. If he profi ts, it’s only because the service he provides is  valuable to others.  

 
If Able were a big bully and could simply steal half of his  neighbors’ catch every day, then it would be true that his  relative wealth would be derived from the relative poverty of  those he oppresses. But these actions, which would involve  forcing others to do something against their own interests,  would not increase the island’s overall productive capacity.  He would simply take what others have produced, and the  island’s production would remain the same. More likely,  overall capacity would fall. The oppressed would cut back  on their work when they realized the fruits of their labor  would be stolen.  
Large-scale examples of such coercion dominate history.  Slavery, serfdom, and peasantry all come to mind. And  while workers do respond to force when their self-interest is  denied, they respond far better if they are the benefi ciaries  of their labor.  
Unfortunately, examples of large-scale economic freedom  are rare in global history. But when self-interest is allowed to  fl ourish, productive capacity expands quickly.  
The use of credit is the perfect example of how economic  freedom works to everyone’s benefi t. As long as lenders and  borrowers are free to strike their own terms, the collective re sults will be a success. However, as we will see later on, the  market for loans can be distorted by outside forces. When it  is, disaster usually ensues. 

CHAPTER 3
As we have just seen, Able decided to loan Baker and  Charlie fish so that they could build nets. Business loans  such as these are the best use of saved capital because  they tend to expand production.  
Of course, the act of lending money—or fi sh—to start  a business is no guarantee that the venture will be  successful. A borrower may not be able to fully execute  on his initial plan.  
That’s what would have happened if Charlie and Baker  failed to produce successful nets.  

 
In other instances, a business may  
fail because the idea never held  
any promise to begin with.  
Suppose instead of asking for  
a loan to build a net, Baker  
and Charlie asked Able for a  
loan that would allow them to  
perfect a technique for mass  
fish hypnosis.  
If the fish wouldn’t fall for it, the loan would produce no  benefi t for the borrowers—Charlie and Baker—or the  lender—Able. 
The bottom line is that loans made to businesses that do  not succeed waste society’s store of savings and diminish  productive capacity. As a result, the lender may then have  trouble getting back his principal, let alone the interest. 
But the business plans that work make up for the ones that  don’t! 
It is important to understand that business loans are not the  only option for society’s store of savings. There are other types  of loans that Able could have made—consumption loans and  emergency loans. 
Consumption Loans 
Suppose that rather than making a loan to Baker and Charlie  to build their own nets, Able had succumbed to their  demands for a loan so they could take a vacation.  

THE MANY USES OF CREDIT 

REALITY CHECK
Whenever an outside force, such as government, encour ages or demands that savers make loans for reasons  that may have nothing to do with the actual likelihood of  repayment, higher degrees of loss are almost inevitable. Such  distortions waste society’s savings. 
In their zeal to do something good, governments like to  infl uence the way savings are lent out. They pass laws that  make some types of loans more appealing than others. But  government has no savings; only individuals do! If, as a result  of government incentives, the loans go to individuals or busi nesses that fail to pay off (and they often do), then the loss  falls to those individuals who have sacrifi cially under con sumed to create savings! 
In fact, Able would be much less inclined to lend in the fi rst place  if he were forced to make loans that he felt were excessively  risky, such as in the case of fish hypnosis. As a result, he may  decide not to work as hard, or not to sacrifi ce as much to save! 
“Hey, Rocke-fi sher,” griped Baker. “Maybe you should take  a break from fish counting and lend me and my pal Charlie  a couple of fish so we can kick back a day or two. You’re  not the only one who deserves a life of leisure. And besides,  we’ll pay you back.” 
“Believe me, I know that fi shing can get to be a drag,”  responded Able. “But remember, if I lend you one fish, I’ll still  want two fish in return to compensate me for the risk.”  

 
“No sweat, Kingfish,”  
countered Charlie.  
“We’ll be so well rested  
after our vacation,  
we’ll be able to fish  
even harder and  
pay you back,  
with interest.” 
But how will Baker and Charlie  
be able to repay the vacation loan,  
with interest, if they do not  
expand their productive  
capacity? After taking  
a few days off, they  
will still only be able  
to catch one fish per day.  
To repay Able, they will need  
to cut their consumption to less than one  
fish per day in the future. Their living standards would have to  drop to repay the loan! 
Knowing this possible consequence, Able tried to be  reasonable. “Look guys, why borrow now and go hungry to  repay the loan, when you can just sacrifi ce now, go hungry for  one day, build your own net, save up for  
the future, and then rest up whenever  
you want?”  
“Listen,” said Baker and Charlie.  
“Save the holier-than-thou bunk. Just  
give us the fish!”
 
Able should deny the loan. Not only would such a transaction  put his savings at unnecessary risk, but it would mean that  the capital would be unavailable for more productive loans.  And while he will earn their scorn, he will actually prevent  future hardship. In actuality, loans to consumers that do not  fundamentally improve productive capacity are a burden to  both the lenders and the borrowers. 
Emergency Loans 
As it turns out, Able’s  
rejection of Baker and  
Charlie’s “vacation”  
(consumption)  
loans was extremely  
fortunate. A week  
later, both are struck by a freak outbreak of the  
Pokalani Pox, which prevents them from fi shing for a week. 
Now, when this emergency arises, Able is in a position to make  a hardship consumer loan out of his accumulated savings  so that Baker and Charlie can eat and  
live to work another day. Although  
he also understands that the risk  
of nonrepayment is high, he  
understands that the  
risk in not making  
the loan is higher. Unlike  
the consumption loan, Baker and  
Charlie can perish if the emergency loan is not made. If this  were to happen, the island would lose productive capacity. 

 
This emergency loan would not have been possible if Able  had already given away his savings through unproductive  consumer loans. 
In fact, savings can mean the difference between the life  and death of society. 

REALITY CHECK
When confronted with the possibility of economic  
contraction, politicians and bankers frequently dis 
cuss the need to “expand credit” by increasing the amount  of money available to be lent. But can this be done on  command? In the case of our fi shing friends, how can Able  legitimately lend out more fish than he has saved? The  island’s total supply of credit is limited by its total supply  of saved fish.  


TAKEAWAY
Unfortunately, it is widely accepted that in order to  
spur activities that politicians and social theorists  deem to be benefi cial, government infl uences how savings  are allocated. This has been accomplished by a litany of  government loan guarantees and corporate and individual  tax credits and penalties.  
As a result of these infl uences, individuals and businesses  may be more willing to apply for, and banks may be more  willing to grant, certain types of loans. More of society’s  resources are then directed toward the favored activity,  whether it be home building, college attendance, or solar  panel manufacturing. 
Central to these impulses is the notion that government  planners have a better idea of what’s good for society than  savers themselves. But there is no evidence that this is true.  In fact, history is littered with grandiose schemes hatched in  government think tanks that have simply not delivered on  their promise.  
But more fundamentally, the imposition of a government  layer in between savers and borrowers separates the cause  and effect of lending, and leads to an ineffi cient allocation  of savings.  
Private lenders tend to be infl uenced only by the fi nancial  results of a loan, rather than the political symbolism of the  underlying activity. Businesses that adhere to successful  models and are run by owners with strong records of achievement tend to repay loans at higher rates. As a result,  these types of business plans tend to attract willing lenders.  Much like Darwin’s idea that natural selection produces  hardier species, this lending discipline tends to produce  healthier companies and a stronger economy.  
But this does not occur when fi nancial performance  becomes secondary. Loans made to individuals or  enterprises that do not succeed in creating a needed  innovation or expanding productive capacity tend to weaken  the overall economy by wasting the supply of savings.  
But as we will see later in the book, the creation of a  constantly expanding money supply, and the government’s  seemingly limitless ability to take on debt, have hidden the  fact that real credit is limited by a fi nite supply of savings.  
People now assume that all that is needed for a functioning  credit market is willing borrowers. But like any other resource,  savings must be accumulated before it can be lent out. 

CHAPTER 4

After a few weeks, Able, Baker, and Charlie had  been raking in the fish with their newly built nets, and  a two-fish-per-day catch had become the norm. After  a threadbare one-fish- per-day diet, who could blame  them? But having experienced the benefi ts that fl ow from  self-sacrifi ce, they decided to save a good portion of that  potential consumption. Every couple of days, they made  do with just one fish apiece. 
Released from the need to fish every waking moment,  the islanders fi nally had the freedom to undertake other  productive and enjoyable activities. Able was able to  devote some time to designing and constructing more  functional—and more fl attering—palm-leaf clothing.  Baker expanded his diet and culinary skills by gathering  coconuts, and Charlie built the island’s fi rst hut. 

Things were going well, but Baker was convinced they could  be even better. He said, “If we can expand production with  hand nets, why not kick it up a notch and go industrial?” He  envisioned a larger and better piece of capital equipment.  
He sketched out the plans for an elaborate fish-catching  device that would revolutionize the island’s economy. The  gizmo involved a huge underwater trap with one-way doors  that could catch fish continually day or night. That’s right— fish check in, but they don’t check out.  
If it worked, they would never have to fish  
again! 
But, Baker soon realized that the he was unable to handle  such a complex project by himself. He thought about  the materials necessary, the netting, the framework, the  construction. His savings, brawn, and ingenuity were simply  not enough for such a colossal project. 
With these thoughts in mind, Baker decided to propose  a joint venture. The three could form a company, under-

ECONOMIC EXPANSION 
consume for a while, pool their savings, and dedicate an  entire week to construction. 
Having listened to Baker’s plan, they began to discuss the  potential risks. As with Able’s fi rst net, there was no guarantee  that the project would work. Even if it did, the whole  contraption could fall apart in its fi rst exposure to rough seas.  But this time it wasn’t just one fish they were risking, but  more than 20!  
However, their demand for more fish overpowered their fear  of losing their savings.  
They moved forward.  
After a supreme effort, the three succeeded in building  the island’s fi rst mega fish catcher. The trap delivered as  advertised and racked up an average of 20 fish per week, with  no fuss and barely any muss. Outside of some minor repairs  and maintenance, the trap was almost entirely automated.  Soon they were swimming in fish. 
With the savings that quickly piled up due to this latest  advancement in productivity,  
the three soon built  
another mega fish  
catcher.  
Fish became so  
abundant that  
they were able  
to dedicate all  
their time to  
other projects. 
 
Charlie used his savings to build  
surfboards, resulting in a  
new ultracool leisure  
activity. 
Able used his savings to  
establish a clothing company  
that would produce items  
not just for himself but for  
any islander who wanted to  
freshen up their image. In  
his spare time, he began  
working on his one-man  
stage play. 
For his part, Baker used his free time  
to focus on the island’s vexing  
transportation problems,  
and developed designs for  
the island’s fi rst canoe  
and cart. 

REALITY CHECK
Savings are not just a means to increase one’s ability  
to spend. They are an essential buffer that shields  
economies from the unexpected. 
Suppose a monsoon came through the island and wiped  out both mega fish catchers? Although many economists  today view natural disasters as stimulative to an economy,  the truth is fl oods, fi res, hurricanes, and earthquakes  destroy wealth and diminish living standards. If the fish  catchers were wiped out, the island’s fish production  would drop, and Able, Baker, and Charlie would have  to underconsume again in order to generate savings to  rebuild their capital.  
But, remember, a pool of spare savings prevents  
disruption and allows for immediate reconstruction of  damaged capital. That is why it is essential that Able,  Baker, and Charlie continue to underconsume and save for  a rainy day. 
 
TAKEAWAY TAKEAWAY
In the past, the United States was known as a nation  
of savers. Throughout much of our history American  citizens typically saved 10 percent or more of their incomes  annually. This discipline not only helped build a huge  supply of savings to fi nance our growing industrial activity,  but it also helped families and communities endure  unexpected hardships. 
However, in recent years, economists have severely  downgraded savings on the economic value chain. In fact,  as far as many economists are concerned, savings are a drag.  Keynesians view savings as detrimental to growth because  the act removes money from circulation and decreases  spending (which they assume is the crucial element in  creating economic growth). Policy makers, infl uenced  by these ideas, have made rules that reward spenders and  penalize savers. 
As a result, Americans have, for years, spent more than we  have earned. In a contained economy, like an island, this  would be impossible. But in our modern world, the fl ow of  money across borders and the seemingly magical qualities  of the printing press have temporarily blinded many  Americans to the simple truth that we can’t consume more  than we produce, or borrow more than we save … at least  not for very long. 
When the economic headwinds began to pick up in earnest in  2008, politicians and economists refl exively looked for a means  to get consumers to spend even more and save even less.  

They have it backward. Spending for its own sake means  nothing. What if you spent $1 million, but bought nothing  but air? How would this benefi t society? It would surely  benefi t the person who sold you the air. He would get  the million dollars formerly belonging to you. Using our  modern methods of economic accounting, such as the  measurement of gross domestic product (GDP), such a  transaction would certainly look like genuine activity. It  would be counted as $1 million worth of growth. 
But the act of buying air does not improve the economy  as a whole. The air was always there. Something has to be  produced to give the spending any value.  
Spending is merely the yardstick that we use to measure  production. Since everything that is produced will  eventually be consumed, why does spending really matter?  Even the stuff that no one really wants will be consumed  if the price falls far enough. But nothing can be consumed  until it is produced. It’s production that adds the value. 
Saving creates the capital that allows for the expansion  of production. As a result, a dollar saved makes more of a  positive economic impact than a dollar spent. Just don’t try  to explain this to an economist or a politician.

CHAPTER 5

The same economic rules that operate in a simple  economic society also apply to a more complicated one.… 
Able’s initial willingness to create capital through his  own personal sacrifi ce benefi ted the other islanders. As  a result of his prudent lending program, the islanders  built many hand nets, and then capitalized on the  increased productivity to fund much more effi cient fish catching machines. In addition to allowing a better diet,  more fl attering attire, and easier transport, the increased  productivity gave rise to leisure time and a burgeoning  surfi ng scene.  
 
Tales of this unprecedented luxury soon spread to other islands,  where fi shing was still done by hand and no one had time to  surf. In search of a better life, immigrants soon arrived.  
The greater productivity of the island meant that it could  support a greater population, which in turn led to greater  economic diversity. Some new immigrants went to work  
servicing the mega fish catchers, while others borrowed the  extra fish to clear the land for farming—at last a balanced  diet! Others took out loans to go into other trades. 
The diversifi ed island economy soon gave rise to hut builders,  canoe builders, wagon builders, you name it.

PROSPERITY LOVES COMPANY 
Society had become so good at producing food and tools that  some people didn’t need to produce anything physical to  survive. As a result, a service sector was born.  
Looking to improve on the delectability of the raw fish,  some islanders developed specialized systems of fish  preparation, often involving spices and fi re. The skills of these chefs became so highly prized  
that the more prosperous  
fishermen and hut  
builders would pay them  
fish in exchange  
for their  
delectable food  
and culinary  
skills. 
Other service jobs  
developed soon after. 
The allure and social benefi ts of surfi ng became so widely  prized that Charlie’s descendants founded a surfi ng school. 
As the society grew and more trades and services were offered,  a medium of exchange was needed so that the hut builder,  chef, or surfi ng instructor could be paid. 
 
Up till now, the island had functioned on a barter system,  where one person traded one good or service for another. But  this process was cumbersome and ineffi cient. A spear maker  may want a chef, but a chef may not want a spear. Even if  their desires did converge, how many cooked meals would a  spear be worth, anyway?  
To replace this system of haphazard deal making, the island  needed something that could be traded for anything and  that was accepted by everybody. In other words, they needed  money.  
Since everyone on this island ate fish, it was decided that fish  would serve as money.  
In short order, all wages and prices  
were quoted in terms of fish.  
And since subsistence was  
still imagined at one fish  
per day, one fish had a  
value to which everyone  
could relate. The island’s  
price structure therefore was  
related to the real (or intrinsic) value of fish.  
Effi ciency and Defl ation 
An economy in which workers can specialize in a specifi c  trade or service is always better than one where everyone does  the same thing. Specialization increases production, which in  turn raises living standards.

Let’s say that it took the average islander fi ve days to make  a canoe. If it is assumed that every islander could catch two  fish per day (with a net), then each person would have to  forgo 10 fish of income in order to build a canoe. However,  suppose one islander named Duffy was a little better at  cutting, hauling, and chopping wood and could make a  canoe in just four days.  
Rather than fi shing like everybody  
else, Duffy would be much  
better off if he just made  
canoes. As he would  
only have to defer  
eight fish in  
income to build  
a canoe, he could  
make a profi t by  
charging nine fish for  
one of his canoes. He  
could raise his income  
through specialization. 
Given these advantages,  
other islanders  
would be wise to  
buy one of Duffy’s  
canoes for nine fish.  
(Left to themselves, they would have to give up 10 fish in  income.) By paying only nine to a specialist, they could  save one fish. 

 
But suppose nine fish represented a fairly steep price…after  all, who has that many fish just lying around? Perhaps at  those prices only the wealthiest islanders could afford a new  canoe. Those who didn’t  
have that level of accrued  
savings would just have  
to keep swimming until  
they had saved enough to  
pull the trigger.  
But let’s imagine that after years of cutting and shaping his  logs with rocks and sharp shells, Duffy used his accumulated  savings to build  
specialized  
canoe-making  
tools. Like  
Able many  
generations  
before, he was  
underconsuming  
in order to generate a  
capital good (tools). 

Because of his better equipment, let’s also imagine that  Duffy cut his building time down to two days. With this  increased effi ciency, he would now only have to charge  four fish instead of eight fish per canoe to break even. If  he lowered his price to six fish (from nine) he would be  more profi table on each canoe he sold (two fish per canoe  
instead of one), and he would be able to crank out twice as  many units. 
This increased productivity benefi ted not only Duffy, but all  the islanders. More could afford a canoe priced at just six fish,  so his customer base increased. 
As a result of this improved effi ciency—made possible by  savings, innovation, and investment—the price for canoes  came down and the benefi ts of canoe ownership became  
available to a wider pool of buyers. What was once a luxury for  the rich became common for everyone. 

 
REALITY CHECK
As echoed in the preceding tale, falling prices don’t  
hurt Duffy. In fact, as prices for all things come down  through similar productivity gains in other industries, the  fish he earns will enable him to buy more things.  
Innovation is a one-way process. Unless people forget what  they already know, effi ciency always compounds. As a  result, prices tend to come down over time.  
Steadily dropping prices also encourage savings as  
islanders begin to understand that their fish would likely  buy more goods in the future than they do today. As crazy  as it sounds, a fish saved is indeed a fish earned. This  encourages savings, thereby swelling the amount of capital  available for loans. 
Employment 
As the society became more complex, more and more  islanders decide to work for other people by trading their  labor for wages. 
The value of labor is always multiplied by the use of capital.  The better the capital, the more valuable the labor. For  instance, you can dig a bigger hole with a bulldozer than with  a shovel, even if you work just as hard with both. Thus, it’s  best to work with the best capital available.  
In a free society all the residents decide for themselves whose  capital to use to magnify the value of their labor. Putting  
